 J.-H. Rosny aîné was the pen name of Joseph Henri Honoré Boex (17 February 1856 – 11 February 1940), a Belgian author considered one of the founding figures of modern science fiction[citation needed]. Born in Brussels in 1856, he wrote in French in collaboration with his younger brother, Séraphin Justin François Boex, under the joint pen name J.-H. Rosny until 1909. After they ended their collaboration, Joseph Boex continued to write under the name Rosny aîné (Rosny the Elder) while his brother used J.-H. Rosny jeune (Rosny the Younger). Rosny aîné was very much like H. G. Wells or Olaf Stapledon in his concepts and his way of dealing with them in his novels. He was the second most important figure after Jules Verne in the history of modern Belgian science fiction. Because his writing was not translated into English before his death, and his readers did not always understand his science fiction novels, his impact on the early evolution of the genre was limited.[1] Rosny's first science fiction tale was the short story Les Xipéhuz [The Shapes] (1887). In the story, which takes place a thousand years before Babylonian times, primitive humans encounter inorganic aliens, with whom all forms of communication prove impossible. Men eventually drive away the invaders, but the hero mourns the loss of another life. This was the first time[citation needed] that science fiction abandoned its usual anthropomorphic approach in the description of alien life. The story "Un Autre Monde" ["Another World"] (1895) establishes that humans share the Earth with the land-bound Moedigen (Dutch for 'brave ones') and the air-borne Vuren ('fires'), two infinitely flat and invisible species who cohabit with us. Only a mutant whose vision is superior to that of ordinary men can see them. In Le Cataclysme [The Cataclysm] (1896), an entire region of France sees the physical laws of nature change, as a result of the arrival of a mysterious electro-magnetic entity from outer space. Rosny's short novel, La Mort de la Terre [The Death of the Earth] (1910), takes place in the distant future, when the Earth has all but dried out. The last descendants of mankind become aware of the emergence of a new species, the metal-based "Ferromagnetals", fated to replace them. Another novel, La Force Mystérieuse [The Mysterious Force] (1913), tells of the destruction of a portion of the light spectrum by a mysterious force—possibly aliens from outer space who, for a brief while, share our physical existence. This causes an initial panic, followed by a progressive and potentially deadly cooling of the world. L'Énigme de Givreuse [The Enigma of Givreuse] (1917) is another novel about a fissiparous human being, divided into two totally similar individuals, each naturally believing himself to be the original. The novella La Jeune Vampire [The Young Vampire] (1920) was the first time that vampirism was described as a genetic mutation, transmissible by birth. L'Étonnant Voyage d'Hareton Ironcastle [The Amazing Journey of Hareton Ironcastle] (1922) is a more traditional adventure novel; in it, explorers eventually discover a fragment of an alien world, with its fauna and flora, attached to Earth. The novel was adapted and retold by Philip José Farmer. Rosny's masterpiece is Les Navigateurs de l'Infini [The Navigators of Infinity] (1925) in which the word astronaut, "astronautique", was coined for the first time [citation needed]. In the story, Rosny's heroes travel to Mars in the "Stellarium", a spaceship powered by artificial gravity and made of "argine", an indestructible, transparent material. On Mars, the human explorers come in contact with the gentle, peaceful, six-eyed, three-legged "Tripèdes", a dying race who is slowly being replaced by the "Zoomorphs", alien entities who bear some resemblance to the "Ferromagnetals" of La Mort de la Terre. Later, a young Martian female, capable of bearing children parthenogenetically by merely wishing it, gives birth to a child after falling in love with one of the human explorers. This heralds the rebirth of the Martian race and, with Man's help, the eventual reconquering of their planet. Rosny also penned five prehistoric novels: Vamireh (1892), Eyrimah (1893), the world-renowned [citation needed]classic La Guerre du Feu better known as The Quest for Fire (1911) which served as the basis for the 1981 film; Le Félin Géant [The Giant Cat] (1918) (sometimes known as Quest of the Dawn Man) and Helgvor du Fleuve Bleu [Helgvor of the Blue River] (1930). The narrative is a combination of various of modern drama with the ability to depict Man's early days. In 1897, Joseph Boex was awarded the French Légion d'honneur and in 1903 was named to the first jury of the Prix Goncourt along with his younger brother. Boex remained involved with the Académie Goncourt and in 1926 became its president. Romain Rolland nominated him for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1928 and 1933.[2] Joseph Boex died in Paris in 1940. Boex married Gertrude Emma Holmes when she was 16 and he was 24 in London on 22 November 1880. They had 4 children together.