 Norwegian singer-songwriter Sigrid has recorded material for two studio albums and three extended plays (EP). She has also collaborated with other artists and covered songs by others. After being encouraged by her brother, Tellef Raabe, to write her own songs, Sigrid wrote and released her first song "Sun" in 2013.[1][2] The song received airplay on Norwegian radio stations and was featured on Norwegian state television NRK's show Urørt.[2][3] In 2014, Sigrid signed a record deal with Petroleum Records.[4] After graduating from high school, she moved to Bergen to pursue a career in music.[3] Tellef featured Sigrid on two songs on his EP Idiographic (2016). By 2016, various British record labels sought to sign Sigrid and she joined Island Records.[5] The label released "Don't Kill My Vibe" as Sigrid's debut single in February 2017.[6] She co-wrote it with Martin Sjølie and it was the first single off her debut EP, Don't Kill My Vibe (2017). Aside from Sjølie, Sigrid worked with Askjell, and George and Harry Flint on the EP. Sigrid's second EP, Raw, followed in 2018. She co-wrote the single "High Five" alongside Sjølie and Emily Warren. Sigrid was the sole writer and producer of the track "Focus (Demo)". Sucker Punch was released as Sigrid's debut album in 2019. It encompasses the electropop and synth-pop genres.[7] Together with previous collaborators, she worked on it with other songwriters such as Noonie Bao, who co-wrote "Business Dinners" and "Never Mine", and Oscar Holter, who co-wrote and produced the single "Don't Feel Like Crying". In 2020, Sigrid appeared on the charity single "Times Like These" as part of Live Lounge Allstars. For her second studio album, How to Let Go (2022), Sigrid "expand[ed] her shimmering synth-pop sound" without hesitance, according to NME's Nick Levine.[8] On the record, she mostly worked with Caroline Ailin and Sylvester Sivertsen, with the latter producing all but one song. Sigrid worked again with Sjølie, who co-wrote and produced "Mistake Like You", and Warren, who contributed to three songs, including the album's lead single "Mirror". Sigrid collaborated with Bring Me the Horizon and Griff on the 2022 tracks "Bad Life" and "Head on Fire", respectively. Her third EP, The Hype (2023), was supported by the single "The Hype" which Sigrid co-wrote and co-produced with Nick Hahn.