Joseph Francis Shea (September 5, 1925 – February 14, 1999) was an American aerospace engineer and NASA manager. After working for Bell Labs on the radio inertial guidance system of the Titan I intercontinental ballistic missile, he was hired by NASA in 1961. As Deputy Director of NASA's Office of Manned Space Flight, and later as head of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, he led NASA to decide in favor of lunar orbit rendezvous and supporting "all up" testing of the Saturn V rocket. Deeply involved in the investigation of the 1967 Apollo 1 fire, he suffered from stress. He was moved to an alternative position in Washington and left NASA shortly afterwards. From 1968 until 1990 he was a senior manager at Raytheon in Lexington, Massachusetts, then worked as an adjunct professor of aeronautics and astronautics at MIT. He served as a consultant for NASA on the redesign of the International Space Station in 1993, but resigned due to health issues. (Full article...) September 5 Norwegian singer-songwriter Sigrid has recorded songs for two studio albums and three extended plays (EPs), and has also collaborated with other artists and covered songs by others. Sigrid wrote and released her first song, "Sun", in 2013. Island Records released her debut single, "Don't Kill My Vibe", in 2017. It was the lead single from her debut EP, Don't Kill My Vibe (2017). Sigrid's second EP, Raw (2018), included the single "High Five" and the self-written "Focus (Demo)". On her debut album, Sucker Punch (2019), Sigrid reunited with previous collaborators Martin Sjølie and Emily Warren, and worked with new songwriters like Noonie Bao and Oscar Holter. Sigrid wrote most of her second album, How to Let Go (2022), with Caroline Ailin and Sylvester Sivertsen. In 2022, Sigrid released singles in collaboration with Bring Me the Horizon and Griff, respectively. The Hype (2023), Sigrid's third EP, was supported by the single "The Hype". (Full list...) John Cage (September 5, 1912 – August 12, 1992) was an American composer and music theorist. A pioneer of indeterminacy in music, electroacoustic music, and the non-standard use of musical instruments, Cage was one of the leading figures of the post-war avant-garde. Critics have lauded him as one of the most influential composers of the 20th century. He was also instrumental in the development of modern dance, mostly through his association with choreographer Merce Cunningham, who was also Cage's romantic partner for most of their lives. Cage's best known work is the 1952 composition 4′33″, a piece performed in the absence of deliberate sound; musicians performing the work do nothing but be present for the duration specified by the title. The content of the composition is intended to be the sounds of the environment heard by the audience during performance. This 1988 head shot of Cage is in the archives of Anefo, a Dutch photograph press agency. Photograph credit: Rob Bogaerts; cropped by Jan Arkesteijn Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects: This Wikipedia is written in English. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below.